well from New York to Brussels at a
European Union Summit on Thursday
leaders called for a pause in the
fighting between Israel and Hamas in
order to get Aid to civilians in Gaza a
declaration issued in the past hour at
the summit calls for the establishment
of humanitarian corridors and pauses
rather than a ceasefire now the EU has
been wrangling over the precise wording
of the agreement for
days yeah the words are important let's
bring in Jack peric from our Brussels
Bureau he's at that Summit Jack
something of a breakthrough after the EU
struggled to find a United response to
the Israeli Hamas War what more do we
know about this
agreement yeah well they've got it over
the line and I think that's pretty
significant and they will be pleased
about that what they've called for the
specific language that we're seeing is
humanitarian corridors and humanitarian
pauses to get things like Aid food
medicine water fuel supply lies into the
civilian population living in Gaza the
battle over this was about exactly what
the wording would be there was talk
about a pause that has come out now as a
plural of pauses what those pauses mean
we don't actually know will it be a half
hour pause to get some Aid in could it
be a call for multiple days would the
Israelis agree to do such a thing that's
one of the big questions here but
countries like Germany and Austria for
instance will be pleased they pretty
much uh completely took off the table
the suggestion that for instance Spain
had said that they would call for a
ceasefire now for the Germans and the
austrians and other countries as well
that was completely unacceptable because
ceasefires need to be negotiated and
that would amount to a call for Israel
to negotiate with Hamas which the EU as
well as obviously Israel denotes as a
terrorist organization most democracies
say they won't negotiate with terrorist
so what the EU is calling for though is
some form of pauses to allow
humanitarian Aid to get into the people
of Gaza countries as I say like Spain
also Ireland and others are very worried
about EU credibility if they weren't to
have some language that called for
support for the civilian plight yeah and
Jack language matters the semantics are
important here at the end of the day
does this declaration does it does it
have any teeth does it carry any
political
weight yeah that really is the big
question will a declaration like this
from the European Union be able to
change the minds of the Israeli
government to allow these pauses they
believe that they're fighting a
terrorist organ they are fighting a
terrorist
organization the EU the United States Mo
most of the Western World believes in
Israel's right to defend itself the
question is will Israel give up even a
moment to allow those Aid corridors to
open and those Aid pauses to take place
really most analysts that I've spoken to
understand that that pressure would only
come and the Diplomatic weight would
only come from Wasing Washington and the
United States whether they agree to get
on board with this call from the
European Union we'll have to wait and
see but EU leaders will say that they've
done what they can today to try and make
sure that the people the civilian
population at least in Gaza are able to
access some humanitarian Aid that's
that's what they want from this language
in this document today and and Jack the
Russian invasion of Ukraine the war in
Ukraine also on the agenda I assume
we're talking about tensions there as
well yeah that's what we're moving on to
now the negot ation on that mid Middle
East issue have taken five long and
difficult hours for the leaders and now
they move on to no less difficult
discussions about financial support for
Ukraine there's a 50 billion Euro Aid
package on the table Ukraine says it
desperately needs additional money most
of the European Union countries want to
give that money to Ukraine the Baltic
countries are very very insistent
obviously in the neighborhood of Russia
that the Ukraine issue isn't too far
sidelined by the Middle East uh
questions and and the issues that
they've been negotiating around that but
countries like Hungary and Slovakia for
instance are seemingly prepared to
prevent that 50 billion Aid Euro Aid
package from going to Ukraine we saw
Hungarian prime minister vikor Orban
shaking hands just a few days ago with
the Russian President Vladimir Putin to
the very very strong frustration and
condemnation at this Summit by his
fellow EU leaders DW's Jack per with the
leaders from that Summit in Brussels
Jack thank you
[Music]
in